<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>
			<p>In the bar, which was a large room with a vacant space in the middle, there were several peasants. sitting by the wall on the tops of some casks, but they looked different from those in <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>’s inn. They were more neatly and uniformly dressed in coarse yellowish-grey cloth, with loose jackets and tightly-fitting trousers. They were smallish men with at first sight a strong mutual resemblance, having flat bony faces, but rounded cheeks. They were all quiet, and sat with hardly a movement, except that they followed the newcomers with their eyes, but they did even that slowly and indifferently. Yet because of their numbers and their quietness they had a certain effect on <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> He took Olga’s arm again as if to explain his presence there. A man rose up from one corner, an acquaintance of Olga’s, and made towards her, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> wheeled her round by the arm in another direction. His action was perceptible to nobody but Olga, and she tolerated it with a smiling side-glance.</p>
			<p>The beer was drawn off by a young girl called Frieda. An unobtrusive little girl with fair hair, sad eyes and hollow cheeks, but with a striking look of conscious superiority. As soon as her eye met <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>’s it seemed to him that her look decided something concerning himself, something which he had not known to exist, but which her look assured him did exist. He kept on studying her from the side, even while she was speaking to Olga. Olga and Frieda were apparently not intimate, they exchanged only a few cold words. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> wanted to hear more, and so interposed with a question on his own account: “Do you know Herr Klamm?” Olga laughed out loud. “What are you laughing at?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> irritably. “I’m not laughing,” she protested, but went on laughing. “Olga is a childish creature,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> bending far over the counter in order to attract Frieda’s gaze again. But she kept her eyes lowered and laughed shyly. “Would you like to see Herr Klamm?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> begged for a sight of him. She pointed to a door just on her left. “There’s a little peephole there, you can look through.” “What about the others?” asked <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> She curled her underlip and pulled <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> to the door with a hand that was unusually soft. The little hole had obviously been bored for spying through, and commanded almost the whole of the neighbouring room. At a desk in the middle of the room in a comfortable armchair sat Herr Klamm, his face brilliantly lit up by an incandescent lamp which hung low before him. A middle-sized, plump and ponderous man. His face was still smooth, but his cheeks were already somewhat flabby with age. His black moustache had long points, his eyes were hidden behind glittering pince-nez that sat awry. If he had been planted squarely before his desk <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> would only have seen his profile, but since he was turned directly towards <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> his whole face was visible. His left elbow lay on the desk, his right hand, in which was a Virginia cigar, rested on his knee. A beer-glass was standing on the desk, but there was a rim round the desk which prevented <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> from seeing whether any papers were lying on it, he had the idea, however, that there were none. To make it certain he asked Frieda to look through the hole and tell him if there were any. But since she had been in that very room a short time ago she was able to inform him without further ado that the desk was empty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> asked Frieda if his time was up, but she told him to go on looking as long as he liked. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> was now alone with Frieda. Olga, as a hasty glance assured him, had found her way to her acquaintance, and was sitting high on a cask swinging her legs. “Frieda,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> in a whisper, “do you know Herr Klamm well?” “Oh, yes,” she said, “very well.” She leaned over to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> and he became aware that she was coquettishly fingering the low-cut cream-coloured blouse which sat oddly on her poor thin body. Then she said: “Didn’t you notice how Olga laughed?” “Yes, the rude creature,” said <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “Well,” she said extenuatingly, “there was a reason for laughing. You asked if I knew Klamm, and you see I”⁠—here she involuntarily lifted her chin a little, and again her triumphant glance, which had no connection whatever with what she was saying, swept over <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>⁠—“I am his mistress.” “Klamm’s mistress,” said <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> She nodded. “Then,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> smiling, to prevent the atmosphere from being too charged with seriousness, “you are for me a highly respectable person.” “Not only for you,” said Frieda amiably, but without returning his smile. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> had a weapon for bringing down her pride, and he tried it: “Have you ever been in the Castle?” But it missed the mark, for she answered: “No, but isn’t it enough for me to be here in the bar?” Her vanity was obviously boundless, and she was trying, it seemed, to get <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> in particular to minister to it. “Of course,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, “here in the bar you’re taking the landlord’s place.” “That’s so,” she assented, “and I began as a byre-maid at the inn by the bridge.” “With those delicate hands,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> half-questioningly, without knowing himself whether he was only flattering her or was compelled by something in her. Her hands were certainly small and delicate, but they could quite as well have been called weak and characterless. “Nobody bothered about them then,” she said, “and even now⁠ ⁠…” <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> looked at her enquiringly. She shook her head and would say no more. “You have your secrets, naturally,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, “and you’re not likely to give them away to somebody you’ve known for only half an hour, and who hasn’t had the chance yet to tell you anything about himself.” This remark proved to be ill-chosen, for it seemed to arouse Frieda as from a trance that was favourable to him. Out of the leather bag hanging at her girdle she took a small piece of wood, stopped up the peephole with it, and said to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> with an obvious attempt to conceal the change in her attitude: “Oh, I know all. about you, you’re the Land Surveyor,” and then adding: “but now I must go back to my work,” she returned to her place behind the bar counter, while a man here and there came up to get his empty glass refilled. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> wanted to speak to her again, so he took an empty glass from a stand and went up to her, saying: “One thing more, Fräulein Frieda, it’s an extraordinary feat and a sign of great strength of mind to have worked your way up from byre-maid to this position in the bar, but can it be the end of all ambition for a person like you? An absurd idea. Your eyes⁠—don’t laugh at me, Fräulein Frieda⁠—speak to me far more of conquests still to come than of conquests past. But the opposition one meets in the world is great, and becomes greater the higher one aims, and it’s no disgrace to accept the help of a man who’s fighting his way up too, even though he’s a small and uninfluential man. Perhaps we could have a quiet talk together sometime, without so many onlookers?” “I don’t know what you’re after,” she said, and in her tone this time there seemed to be, against her will, an echo rather of countless disappointments than of past triumphs. “Do you want to take me away from Klamm, perhaps? O heavens!” and she clapped her hands. “You’ve seen through me,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, as if wearied by so much mistrust, “that’s exactly my real secret intention. You ought to leave Klamm and become my sweetheart. And now I can go. Olga!” he cried, “we’re going home.” Obediently Olga slid down from her cask, but did not succeed immediately in breaking through her ring of friends. Then Frieda said in a low voice, with a hectoring look at <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>: “When can I talk to you?” “Can I spend the night here?” asked <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “Yes,” said Frieda. “Can I stay now?” “Go out first with Olga, so that I can clear out all the others. Then you can come back in a little.” “Right,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, and he waited impatiently for Olga. But the peasants would not let her go; they had made up a dance in which she was the central figure, they circled round her yelling all together and every now and then one of them left the ring, seized Olga firmly round the waist and whirled her round and round; the pace grew faster and faster, the yells more hungry, more raucous, until they were insensibly blended into one continuous howl. Olga, who had begun laughingly by trying to break out of the ring, was now merely reeling with flying hair from one man to the other. “That’s the kind of people I’m saddled with,” said Frieda, biting her thin lips in scorn. “Who are they?” asked <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “Klamm’s servants,” said Frieda, “he keeps on bringing those people with him, and they upset me. I can hardly tell what I’ve been saying to you, but please forgive me if I’ve offended you, it’s these people who are to blame, they’re the most contemptible and objectionable creatures I know, and I have to fill their glasses up with beer for them. How often I’ve implored Klamm to leave them behind him, for though I have to put up with the other gentlemen’s servants, he could surely have some consideration for me; but it’s all of no use, an hour before his arrival they always come bursting in like cattle into their stall. But now they’ve really got to get into the stall, where they belong. If you weren’t here I’d fling open this door and Klamm would be forced to drive them out himself.” “Can’t he hear them, then?” asked <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “No,” said Frieda, “he’s asleep.” “Asleep?” cried <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “But when I peeped in he was awake and sitting at the desk.” “He always sits like that,” said Frieda, “he was sleeping when you saw him. Would I have let you look in if he hadn’t been asleep? That’s how he sleeps, the gentlemen do sleep a great deal, it’s hard to understand. Anyhow, if he didn’t sleep so much, he wouldn’t be able to put up with his servants. But now I’ll have to turn them out myself.” She took a whip from a corner and sprang among the dancers with a single bound, a little uncertainly, as a young lamb might spring. At first they faced her as if she were merely a new partner, and actually for a moment Frieda seemed inclined to let the whip fall, but she soon raised it again, crying, “In the name of Klamm into the stall with you, into the stall, all of you!” When they saw that she was in earnest they began to press towards the back wall in a kind of panic incomprehensible to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, and under the impact of the first few a door shot open, letting in a current of night air, through which they all vanished with Frieda behind them openly driving them across the courtyard into the stalls.</p>
			<p>In the sudden silence which ensued <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> heard steps in the vestibule. With some idea of securing his position he dodged behind the bar counter, which afforded the only possible cover in the room. He had an admitted right to be in the bar, but since he meant to spend the night there he had to avoid being seen. So when the door was actually opened he slid under the counter. To be discovered there of course would have its dangers too, yet he could explain plausibly enough that he had only taken refuge from the wild license of the peasants. It was the landlord who came in. “Frieda!” he called, and walked up and down the room several times.</p>
			<p>Fortunately Frieda soon came back; she did not mention <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, she only complained about the peasants, and in the course of looking round for <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> went behind the counter, so that he was able to touch her foot. From that moment he felt safe. Since Frieda made no reference to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, however, the landlord was compelled to do it. “And where is the Land Surveyor?” he asked. He was probably courteous by nature, refined by constant and relatively free intercourse with men who were much his superior, but there was remarkable consideration in his tone to Frieda, which was all the more striking because in his conversation he did not cease to be an employer addressing a servant, and a saucy servant at that. “The Land Surveyor⁠—I forgot all about him,” said Frieda, setting her small foot on <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>’s chest. “He must have gone out long ago.” “But I haven’t seen him,” said the landlord, “and I was in the hall nearly the whole time.” “Well, he isn’t in here,” said Frieda coolly. “Perhaps he’s hidden somewhere,” went on the landlord. “From the impression I had of him he’s capable of a good deal.” “He would hardly have the cheek to do that,” said Frieda, pressing her foot down on <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> There was a certain mirth and freedom about her which <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> had not previously remarked, and quite unexpectedly it took the upper hand, for suddenly laughing she bent down to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> with the words: “Perhaps he’s hidden underneath here,” kissed him lightly and sprang up again saying with a troubled air: “No, he’s not there.” Then the landlord too surprised <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> when he said: “It bothers me not to know for certain that he’s gone. Not only because of Herr Klamm, but because of the rule of the house. And the rule applies to you, Fräulein Frieda, just as much as to me. Well, if you answer for the bar, I’ll go through the rest of the rooms. Good night! Sleep well!” He could hardly have left the room before Frieda had turned out the electric light and was under the counter beside <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “My darling! My darling!” she whispered, but she did not touch him. As if swooning with love she lay on her back and stretched out her arms; time must have seemed endless to her in the prospect of her happiness, and she sighed rather than sang some little song or other. Then as <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> still lay absorbed in thought, she started up and began to tug at him like a child: “Come on, it’s too close down here,” and they embraced each other, her little body burned in <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>’s hands, in a state of unconsciousness which <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> tried again and again but in vain to master they rolled a little way, landing with a thud on Klamm’s door, where they lay among the small puddles of beer and other refuse gathered on the floor. There hours went past, hours in which they breathed as one, in which their hearts beat as one, hours in which <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> was haunted by the feeling that he was losing himself or wandering into a strange country, further than ever man had wandered before, a country so strange that not even the air had anything in common with his native air, where one might die of strangeness, and yet whose enchantment was such that one could only go on and lose oneself further. So it came to him not as a shock but as a faint glimmer of comfort when from Klamm’s room a deep, authoritative impersonal voice called for Frieda. “Frieda,” whispered <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> in Frieda’s ear, passing on the summons. With a mechanical instinct of obedience Frieda made as if to spring to her feet, then she remembered where she was, stretched herself, laughing quietly, and said: “I’m not going, I’m never going to him again.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> wanted to object, to urge her to go to Klamm, and began to fasten up her disordered blouse, but he could not bring himself to speak, he was too happy to have Frieda in his arms, too troubled also in his happiness, for it seemed to him that in letting Frieda go he would lose all he had. And as if his support had strengthened her Frieda clenched her fist and beat upon the door, crying: “I’m with the Land Surveyor!” That silenced Klamm at any rate, but <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> started up, and on his knees beside Frieda gazed round him in the uncertain light of dawn. What had happened? Where were his hopes? What could he expect from Frieda now that she had betrayed everything? Instead of feeling his way with the prudence befitting the greatness of his enemy and of his ambition, he had spent a whole night wallowing in puddles of beer, the smell of which was nearly overpowering. “What have you done?” he said as if to himself. “We are both ruined.” “No,” said Frieda, “it’s only me that’s ruined, but then I’ve won you. Don’t worry. But just look how these two are laughing.” “Who?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr>, and turned round. There on the bar counter sat his two assistants, a little heavy-eyed for lack of sleep, but cheerful. It was a cheerfulness arising from a sense of duty well done. “What are you doing here?” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> as if they were to blame for everything. “We had to search for you,” explained the assistants, “since you didn’t come back to the inn; we looked for you at Barnabas’s and finally found you here. We have been sitting here all night. Ours is no easy job.” “It’s in the daytime I need you,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> “not in the night. Clear out.” “But it’s daytime now,” said they without moving. It was really day, the doors into the courtyard were opened, the peasants came streaming in and with them Olga, whom <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> had completely forgotten. Although her hair and clothes were in disorder Olga was as alert as on the previous evening, and her eyes flew to <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> before she was well over the threshold. “Why did you not come home with me?” she asked, almost weeping. “All for a creature like that!” she said then, and repeated the remark several times. Frieda, who had vanished for a moment, came back with a small bundle of clothing, and Olga moved sadly to one side. “Now we can be off,” said Frieda, it was obvious she meant that they should go back to the inn by the bridge. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> walked with Frieda, and behind them the assistants; that was the little procession. The peasants displayed a great contempt for Frieda, which was understandable, for she had lorded it over them hitherto; one of them even took a stick and held it as if to prevent her from going out until she had jumped over it, but a look from her sufficed to quell him. When they were out in the snow <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> breathed a little more freely. It was such a relief to be in the open air that the journey seemed less laborious; if he had been alone he would have got on still better. When he reached the inn he went straight to his room and lay down on the bed. Frieda prepared a couch for herself on the floor beside him. The assistants had pushed their way in too, and on being driven out came back through the window. <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> was too weary to drive them out again. The landlady came up specially to welcome Frieda, who hailed her as “mother”; their meeting was inexplicably affectionate, with kisses and long embracings. There was little peace and quietness to be had in the room, for the maids too came clumping in with their heavy boots, bringing or seeking various articles, and whenever they wanted anything from the miscellaneous assortment on the bed they simply pulled it out from under <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> They greeted Frieda as one of themselves. In spite of all this coming and going <abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">K.</abbr> stayed in bed the whole day through, and the whole night. Frieda performed little offices for him. When he got up at last on the following morning he was much refreshed, and it was the fourth day since his arrival in the village.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
